chore: compliance reporting ADR (#1824)
defenseunicorns/pepr: adr/0016-compliance-in-pepr.md

### Consequences ###

- Extend the Capability class with a new function, such as `CompliesWith()`, that accepts a strongly typed control to associate it with a given binding.
- Store compliance data in `PeprStore` in a new instance prevent corruption of compliance data through Store API.
- Enhance the Pepr CLI to generate compliance reports based on stored compliance data.

##### Pros

- Gives Pepr the ability to generate compliance reports based on the status of compliance controls on demand.
- Straightforward to implement and maintain.
- Should not make a major impact in terms of resource utilization.
- Report generation can be automated.

##### Cons

- Module Authors need to update their modules to include compliance controls.
- It is possible that Pepr may need to introduce a new depedency to support reporting in certain formats.

### Related Repos ###

These repos are related to this ADR in that they house collections of admission policies.

- [Kubernetes Validating Admission Policy Library](https://github.com/vap-library/vap-library)

> - [CEL Admission Library](https://github.com/kubescape/cel-admission-library)

Reviewer: A few missing bits that we discussed are:
- pepr should only provide the mechanism to run the validation, the validation rules can be bundled separately, potentially we'll create a default list of validation, but users can add their own;
- the report generation should be either on-demand, or on schedule.

Author: Thanks, I attempted to speak to this in the new `## Goals` section. I am not entirely sure that I understood the top point. Let me know how I can change it to account for you point if it does not meet it. I am guessing you are talking about a canned set of controls?

# 14. Compliance in Pepr 

Date: 2025-02-13

## Status

Pending

## Context

Pepr needs to generate reports for compliance purposes, demonstrating adherence to required security and compliance standards through specific bindings. To achieve this, it’s essential to map compliance controls to Pepr’s bindings. During our discovery process, we determined that Pepr’s role in compliance should focus on reporting rather than enforcement. This is because compliance controls are already enforced through the bindings themselves, and Pepr’s primary function is to report on the compliance status of resources.

## Decision

Extend the fluent API with a new keyword function that accepts a strongly typed control, allowing it to be associated with a given binding. This enables users to map compliance controls to Pepr’s bindings, facilitating the generation of compliance reports based on control status.

### Consequences ###

- Extend the Capability class with a new function, such as `CompliesWith()`, that accepts a strongly typed control to associate it with a given binding.

> - Store compliance data in `PeprStore` (or introduce a new store for this purpose).

Author: Second thought I think we should just use a new `PeprStore` resource like we do with the schedule that is out of scope for the Store actions that are exposed to the Module author instead

- Prevent deletion of compliance data from PeprStore for audit purposes, unless a new store is used.
- Enhance the Pepr CLI to generate compliance reports based on stored compliance data.

##### Pros

- Gives Pepr the ability to generate compliance reports based on the status of compliance controls on demand.
- Straightforward to implement and maintain.
- Should not make a major impact in terms of resource utilization.

##### Cons

_Questions_

> - How do Exemptions work here?

Author: Not sure this is a Pepr Core concern or a concern of the Module author

# 14. Compliance in Pepr 

Date: 2025-02-13

## Status

Pending

> ## Context

Reviewer 2: I get the feeling there is some context missing here with regards to the primary functions that pepr provides and the performance of compliance objectives. They are not innately the same and the _need_ to generate reports for compliance feels like it is missing more background. 

What does Pepr do today? What could pepr do to enable compliance? 

I think it is more than reporting - Evidence Collection -> Evaluation -> Aggregation -> Storage -> Reporting

Reviewer 3: We're getting the concept rolling over in [compliance-reporter](https://github.com/defenseunicorns/compliance-reporter). Specifics around how & what compliance is with respect to Pepr will be iterated upon over there.

Pepr needs to generate reports for compliance purposes, demonstrating adherence to required security and compliance standards through specific bindings. To achieve this, it’s essential to map compliance controls to Pepr’s bindings. During our discovery process, we determined that Pepr’s role in compliance should focus on reporting rather than enforcement. This is because compliance controls are already enforced through the bindings themselves, and Pepr’s primary function is to report on the compliance status of resources.

## Decision

> Extend the fluent API with a new keyword function that accepts a strongly typed control, allowing it to be associated with a given binding. This enables users to map compliance controls to Pepr’s bindings, facilitating the generation of compliance reports based on control status.

Reviewer 2: Is the intent to stick to admission or provide a separate example/implementation? 

I believe admission enables compliance - but is not indicative of compliance as a whole.

`OnSchedule` I think has a lot of room for use here as the general baseline. 

Not to say this mechanism couldn't be used on admission - considering the levels of fidelity in doing so is important though.

Reviewer 2: The answer influences some questions I had below on if module authors _need_ to update their modules or if this is outright a separate implementation.

Author: Good points, in this case, it is the module author that is writing the Pepr bindings that is responsible for enforcing the compliance. The job is Pepr Core is to enable reporting on the bindings and functions

## Goals

- Pepr to provide the mechanism to run the validation reports.
- The report generation should be either on-demand or on schedule.

> ## Non-Goals

Reviewer 2: Are there any intended boundaries as goals or non-goals? IE is this specifically for Kubernetes or would there be intent to support infrastructure and other endpoints?

Author: Great point, it is a goal to be able to report on non-Pepr governance/non-Kubernetes governance should the module author desire to

- To create a new way to enforce validation outside of the Pepr Modules.

### Consequences ###

- Extend the Capability class with a new function, such as `CompliesWith()`, that accepts a strongly typed control to associate it with a given binding.

> - Store compliance data in `PeprStore` in a new instance to prevent corruption of compliance data through Store API.

Reviewer 2: It may be worth annotating more granularly _what_ is intended to be stored. Mappings of `control` <> `status` for each definition or an overall collective status. As well as potentially any evidence.

Author: Great point

# 14. Compliance in Pepr 

Date: 2025-02-13

## Status

Accepted

## Context

Pepr needs to generate reports for compliance purposes, demonstrating adherence to required security and compliance standards through specific bindings. To achieve this, it’s essential to map compliance controls to Pepr Modules. During our discovery process, we determined that Pepr’s role in compliance should focus on reporting rather than enforcement. This is because compliance controls are already enforced through the bindings themselves, and Pepr’s primary function is to report on the compliance status of resources.

## Decision

> After careful consideration, we deciding on creating an external library, [`compliance-reporter`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/compliance-reporter) that accepts a strongly typed controls, allowing automation of compliance reporting that is consumable by Pepr Modules. This facilitates the generation of compliance reports based on control status. Controls are defined via a `registerControls()` function that takes a `Record<string, Control>` argument. These can be called anywhere and more than once to register all controls. The return value will be used with `mapControl()` to associate a `ControlImplementation` with a `Control`. This is a one-to-one or one-to-many relationship. When multiple ControlImplementations are needed to satisfy a Control, a coverage property can be set to track the estimated percentage of the `Control` that is covered.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After careful consideration, we created an external library, [`compliance-reporter`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/compliance-reporter) that accepts a strongly typed controls, allowing automation of compliance reporting that is consumable by Pepr Modules. This facilitates the generation of compliance reports based on control status. Controls are defined via a `registerControls()` function that takes a `Record<string, Control>` argument. These can be called anywhere and more than once to register all controls. The return value will be used with `mapControl()` to associate a `ControlImplementation` with a `Control`. This is a one-to-one or one-to-many relationship. When multiple ControlImplementations are needed to satisfy a Control, a coverage property can be set to track the estimated percentage of the `Control` that is covered.
```

## Goals

> - Compliance Reporter to provide the mechanism to run the validation reports.
> - The report generation should be either on-demand or on schedule, but first step is to a create `ConfigMap` to be consumed be other services.
> - Ensure compliance reports aggregate all registered controls, even those without implementations.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Compliance Reporter provides the mechanism to run validation reports.
- The report generation should be either on-demand or on schedule, but first step is to a create `ConfigMap` to be consumed bye other services.
- Ensure compliance reports aggregate all registered controls, even those without implementations.
```

## Non-Goals

- To create a new way to enforce validation outside of the Pepr Modules.

### Consequences ###

- Introduce `registerControls()` to register compliance controls outside of the bindings.
- Store compliance data in a `ConfigMap` or other Kubernetes resource to be consumed by other services.
- Implement `generateComplianceReport()` to aggregate and related all control data. 
- Provide `findComplianceGaps()` to list all congrols with < 100% coverage.

##### Pros

> - Gives Pepr the ability to generate compliance reports based on the status of compliance controls on demand through another library.
> - Straightforward to implement and maintain.
> - Should not make a major impact in terms of resource utilization.
> - Report generation can be automated.
> - Enables type completions for mapping controls for type visibility.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Gives Pepr the ability to generate compliance reports based on the status of compliance controls on-demand through another library.
- Straightforward to implement and maintain.
- Should not make a major impact in terms of resource utilization.
- Report generation can be automated.
- Enables type-completions for mapping controls for type visibility.
```
